41/WAKU2-RLN-CONTRACT: Raw spec (#522)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/41/README.md

---
slug: 41
title: 41/WAKU2-RLN-CONTRACT
name: Rate Limiting Nullifier Membership Contract
status: raw

> category: RLN

Reviewer: Category should be one of (Standards Track|Informational|Best Current Practice).
In this case, most likely `Standards Track`.

> tags: 17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY

Reviewer: For now, the only well defined tags are `waku-application` and `waku-core-protocol`.
We could introduce a new tag here, but I'd rather simply name it RLN, or RLN-core.
Any opinions?

editor: Keshav Gupta <keshav@status.im>
contributors:
---

> ## Tags

Reviewer: This section is just informational in the template. See template:

> This section (including its subsections) MUST be removed.

Currently identified tags comprise

* `17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY` protocol is an extension of `11/WAKU-RELAY` which additionally provides spam protection using Rate Limiting Nullifiers (RLN).

> # Abstract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Abstract

```

> The following standard allows for the implementation of a standard API for Rate Limiting Nullifier Contract that manages membership of the participants in a peer-to-peer messaging group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following standard specifies a standard API for Rate Limiting Nullifier Contract that manages membership of the participants in a peer-to-peer messaging group.
```

This API is intended to be used in conjunction with [17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/17/).
Peers that violate the messaging rate in a relay network,
like explained in [11/WAKU2-RELAY](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/11/),

> are considered spammers and their message is considered spam.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are considered spammers and their messages are considered spam.
```

Spammers are financially punished and removed from the system.
Rate limiting nullifier (RLN), like explained in [32/RLN](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/32/),

> a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that provides an anonymous rate-limited signaling/messaging framework suitable for decentralized (and centralized) environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a construct based on zero-knowledge proofs that provides an anonymous rate-limited signaling/messaging framework suitable for decentralized (and centralized) environments.
```

# Background / Rationale / Motivation

> This contract serves as the basis for the implementation of RLN membership.

Reviewer: The spec should not depends on its abstract.
I'd make explicit what "this contract" is.
I'd at least say: "The RLN contract".
Better yet,  add a description of what RLN is in one or two sentences.

Reviewer: Reading it again, I'd add at least one introductory sentence at the beginning of this section.

New members can be registered by depositing a stake of valuable funds.
They can also be slashed if they misbehave like spamming in a peer-to-peer pseudo-anonymous messaging network.
Peers MUST be registered to the RLN group to be able to publish messages.
Each peer has an RLN key pair denoted by `secret` and `pubkey`.
The state of the membership contract contains the list of registered members' public identity keys i.e., `pubkeys`.

> For the registration, a peer creates a transaction that invokes the registration function of the contract via which registers its `pubkey` in the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the registration, a peer creates a transaction that invokes the registration function of the contract.
This function registers the respective peer's `pubkey` with the group.
```

The peer who has the secret key `secret` associated with a registered `pubkey` would be able to withdraw a portion the staked fund by providing valid proof.

> 

Reviewer: Coming back to my first comment on this section, I'd reorganize this section.

Starting with

> This contract serves as the basis for the implementation of RLN membership.

is a bit confusing.

# Theory / Semantics

As explained in [17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/17/),
all peers who want to publish the message in the spam protected peer-to-peer network MUST register for membership to the RLN group.
This is done via the `register` function of the RLN membership contract.

> If a registered member of the RLN group spams messages in the network then its secret key get exposed which can be used to slash its membership from the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a registered member of the RLN group spams messages in the network then its secret key gets exposed which can be used to slash its membership from the group.
```

This is done by calling the `withdraw` function of the RLN membership contract, which removes the member from the Merkle tree thereby revoking its rights to send any messages.

> 

Reviewer: In a future draft (or at least for the stable function), I'd expect a more in depth explanation here.

> # Wire Format Specification / Syntax

Reviewer: The section names in the template may be adjusted if it makes sense. Their content is what MUST be there.
While this section should exist and contain an implementable spec, in this case, I'd rather call it

`Contract Specification`

(This spec does not specify a protocol with wire format).

This function MUST remove the associated members from the list of members.
This function MUST fire the `MemberWithdrawn` event for each member slashed from the group.
    * `function withdrawBatch(uint256[] calldata secrets, uint256[] calldata pubkeyIndexes, address payable[] calldata receivers) external`

### Events

* MemberRegistered: MUST trigger when a member is registered to the RLN group.
    * `event MemberRegistered(uint256 indexed pubkey, uint256 indexed index)`

* MemberWithdrawn: MUST  trigger when a member is slashed from the RLN group.
    * `event MemberWithdrawn(uint256 indexed pubkey, uint256 indexed index)`

# Implementation Suggestions

Complete implementation of this contract can be found at https://github.com/vacp2p/rln-contract

The contract for Poseidon Hasher can be found at https://github.com/vacp2p/rln-contract/blob/main/contracts/PoseidonHasher.sol

# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

> 

Reviewer: `References` Section listing the references in this spec. (See other specs)

---
slug: 41
title: 41/WAKU2-RLN-CONTRACT

> name: Rate Limiting Nullifier Contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
name: Rate Limiting Nullifier Membership Contract
```

Author: cdaa21ac076a8e0415cc13b40ef2ffd89b48241b

status: raw
category: RLN
tags: 17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY
editor: Keshav Gupta <keshav@status.im>
contributors:
---

## Tags

Currently identified tags comprise

* `17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY` protocol is an extension of `11/WAKU-RELAY` which additionally provides spam protection using Rate Limiting Nullifiers (RLN).

# Abstract

> The following standard allows for the implementation of a standard API for Rate Limiting Nullifier Contract that manages membership of the participants in a group.

Reviewer 3: If this is the scope, then it's independent from RLN. I think here should be mentioned how RLN disincentivizes spam (i.e., economically) by attaching proofs which reveal shares of the private key to sent messages.

Reviewer 2: As it is, it does not indicate how this API relates to the RLN-Relay and the RLN RFC. More elaboration is needed.

> # Background / Rationale / Motivation

Reviewer 2: In here, we need more details on how each membership is represented, the relation between user sk and pk.

Author: Refer 977f0d077f3916ad89231f1020eec7f2846527ed

> This contract serves as the basis for the implementation of RLN membership. New members can be registered by depositing a stake of valuable funds.

Reviewer 3: I think here the relevant RFCs should be reported and briefly explained, stressing their role with respect to this

https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/17/, https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/32/, https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/11/

Author: Referenced in Abstract 1155d3c3f5614f9322219834187440bd69d14fd9

They can also be slashed if they misbehave like spamming in a peer to peer pseudo-anonymous messaging network.

# Theory / Semantics

> As explained in [17/WAKU-RLN-RELAY](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/17/), all peers who want to publish the message in the spam protected peer to peer network MUST register for membership to the RLN group. This is done via the `register` function of the RLN membership contract. If a registered member of the RLN group spams messages in the network then its secret key get exposed which can be used to slash its membership from the group. This is done by calling the `withdraw` function of the RLN membership contract, which removes the member from the merkle tree thereby revoking its rights to send any messages.

Reviewer 3: Please use sematic line break as mentioned in https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/#conventions.

Reviewer 3: I think this sentence had to be slightly rephrased. The role of the deposit is not mentioned at this point, but later is in the contract APIs.

merkle tree -> Merkle tree.
peer to peer -> peer-to-peer

# Wire Format Specification / Syntax

### Constructor

* `constructor(uint256 membershipDeposit, uint256 depth, address _poseidonHasher) public`
    * `membershipDeposit` sets the amount of ETH that must be deposited to `register` to the RLN group.

>     * `depth` is the depth of the merkle tree that determines the maximum number of members to the RLN group.

Reviewer 2: The Merkle tree has not been introduced before in this RFC. It needs to be explained in the "background" section.

>     * `_poseidonHasher` is the address of the poseidon hasher contract used in the `hash` function.

Reviewer 4: Probably it's a good idea to include a reference to the poseidon hasher contract in the implementations section

Author: Refer dd53832c195d0089840289f8e7ec184f92a00fc5

### Methods

* register: This function registers the `pubkey` to the list of members.

> For successful registration, ETH equal to the amount specified in `membershipDeposit` MUST be paid while calling this function.

Reviewer 4: Should the condition `pubkeyIndex < SET_SIZE` be described as one of the conditions required for a succesful `register`?

Author: This can be better addressed as an issue in the contract implementation rather than the RFC?

This function MUST fire the `MemberRegistered` event.
    * `function register(uint256 pubkey) external payable`

* registerBatch: This function registers multiple `pubkeys` to the list of members.
For succesful registration, ETH equal to the amount specified in `membershipDeposit * pubkeys.length` MUST be paid while calling this function.
This function MUST fire the `MemberRegistered` event for each registered member.
    * `function registerBatch(uint256[] calldata pubkeys) external payable`

> * withdraw: This function accepts the `secret` of the public key at index`_pubkeyIndex` to withdraw the ETH equal to the`membershipDeposit` to the `receiver` address.

Reviewer 3: From what is written above and here, it seems like a spammer could prepare lots of spam messages (that would eventually slash him) while preparing a transaction to withdraw the deposit to another address in his possession. In fact, by knowing in advance that he will be slashed, he can front-run relayers to get the deposit.

AFAIR, we discussed that the amount withdrawn should be less than the `membershipDeposit` so that we disincentivize such behavior (or as @fryorcraken said, we not allow any deposit to be withdraw).

Reviewer 2: Right, this is a well-known issue re RLN slashing model and the followings are the identified countermeasures:
- X1 portion of the fund can be charged as a fee (for protocol revenue as indicated in https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/issues/485)
- X2 portion of the fund can optionally be burned
- Only a X3 portion is refundable to the account holder where X1 + X2 + X3 = 1
X1, X2 and X3 all should be configurable options in the constructor. 
I think the second and third items must be easily integratabtle in the current RFC. @kgrgpg Please update the write up to reflect the last 2. For the first item, there is a separate issue https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/issues/485

Author: A new PR of this RFC will be created once https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/issues/485 issue is solved and https://github.com/vacp2p/rln-contract/pull/5 PR on the RLN contract is approved

This function MUST remove the associated member from the list of members.
This function MUST fire the `MemberWithdrawn` event.

>     * `function withdraw(uint256 secret, uint256 _pubkeyIndex, address payable receiver) external`

Reviewer 3: this is more a contract issue, but I find confusing using `_pubkeyIndex` to denote the withdrawn public key index, while the global variable containing the next available Merkle tree index in is named `pubkeyIndex`

Reviewer: I agree. I'd suggest changing this even for the raw spec.
The spec should be a clear guideline to implementers and not be confusing.

* withdrawBatch: This function accepts multiple `secrets` of the public keys at the indices `pubkeyIndexes` to withdraw the ETH equal to the `membershipDeposit * secrets.length` to the `receiver` address.
This function MUST remove the associated members from the list of members.
This function MUST fire the `MemberWithdrawn` event for each member slashed from the group.
    * `function withdrawBatch(uint256[] calldata secrets, uint256[] calldata pubkeyIndexes, address payable[] calldata receivers) external`

### Events

* MemberRegistered: MUST trigger when a member is registered to the RLN group.
    * `event MemberRegistered(uint256 indexed pubkey, uint256 indexed index)`

* MemberWithdrawn: MUST  trigger when a member is slashed from the RLN group.

>     * `event MemberWithdrawn(uint256 indexed pubkey, uint256 indexed index)`

Reviewer 3: Again, this is a contract issue: why emitting the pubkey? The index should be enough to correctly identify the slashed key and save gas.

Reviewer 2: > Again, this is a contract issue: why emitting the pubkey? The index should be enough to correctly identify the slashed key and save gas.

The pk may be needed for cases that the event listeners do not have the whole Merkle tree stored.

Reviewer 3: And then why it should listen to such event? I think the main goal is to update the local copy of the Merkle tree, but for this you just need to delete the previous leaf at the slashed index (but the leaf has to correctly be there, unless is last leaf added, in order to correctly recompute the root)

Reviewer 2: It is true that in the current implementation, we keep the Merkle tree and emitting the pk may not be necessary, but consider the case that instead of replacing the leaf, a blacklist of Pks is maintained. Emitting the pk gives the flexibility for such solutions.

# Implementation Suggestions

> 

Reviewer 4: Instead of referencing the implementation of the contract via a github link, what do you think of adding the solidity source code just like it is done in the ethereum [ERCs](https://eips.ethereum.org/erc)? otherwise, it might be a good idea to reference an specific commit / branch, so this spec matches the contract at an specific point in time.

Author: Will this make the RFC too long or clunky? But I do agree that specific changes to the RFC can be mapped to the specific commits/branch of the contract implementation.

Reviewer: I'd not put an implementation here, as such specs should be implementation detail agnostic.
The purpose of this section is more to give guidance, e.g., pointing specific implementation choices that significantly improve performance.

If you want to link the implementation. I'd add a new subsection "Example Implementation".

You could also add an appendix that contains the whole source code.

> Complete implementation of this contract can be found at https://github.com/kilic/rlnapp/blob/master/packages/contracts/contracts/RLN.sol

Reviewer 3: Should this be updated to https://github.com/vacp2p/rln-contract ?

Author: 6cfa7a00cb920693547254bcb06f6e67940c76a0
